Title: Thursday May 16: Book presentation Sággun máilbmi with the artist Britta Marakatt-Labba and the curator, writer and editor Jan-ErikLundström

----

Add-text: Konstverkstan

----

Info:

##Book presentation Sággun máilbmi with the artist Britta Marakatt-Labba and the curator, writer and editor Jan-Erik Lundström

19:00 Kin Museum of Contemporary Art, Konstverkstan, floor 0.5
Sággon máilmmit/Broderade världar/Embroidered Worlds
is the title of the new book about Britta Marakatt-Labba’s art. Elegantly designed by Milena Karlsson, Sággon máilmmit/ Broderade världar/Embroidered Worlds is a generous and comprehensive review of Marakatt-Labba’s art. Over more than 130 illustrated pages, more than ninety works are presented, most of them from recent years, a time of intense productivity for her. The book contains a suite of poems by the Sami-Swedish poet Linnea Axelsson, an in-depth conversation in which the artist and writer Lena Ylipää meets the artist herself, and finally, three newly written essays—by Sami-Norwegian cultural studies specialist Britt Kramvig, Inuit curator and art historian Heather Igloliorte, and art historian and writer Jan-Erik Lundström, who also edited the book—who generously share their insight and views, perspectives, and knowledge of Britta Marakatt-Labba’s art.

Sággon máilmmit/Broderade världar/Embroidered Worlds is fully trilingual—Sami, Swedish, and English. Jan-Erik Lundström is a curator, writer, and historian who focuses on contemporary art, visual culture, and photography. He is the former director for Samisk senter for samtidskunst and the Norrbotten county
museum. Lundström has also been the director of Bildmuseet in Umeå and head curator of Fotografiska museet at Moderna museet in Stockholm. Lundström is head of the board for the magazines Paletten and Skogen. His curatorial projects include Čajet Ivnni/Show Colour: Resist, Stand up, Advocate, Surviving the Future, The Map: Critical Cartographies, Platsens politik, Same, same but different, Nordic Landscapes and several biennials, including Bukarest Biennial III, 1st Thessaloniki Biennial of Contemporary Art, Berlin Photography Festival, and Luleå Art Biennial. Lundström is an author and editor of publications like Tankar om Fotografi, Thinking Photography—Using Photography, Contemporary Sami Art and Design, Ursula Biemann: Mission Reports, Britta Marakatt-Labba: Broderade berättelser, Nordiska landskap, Looking North: Visual and Literary Representations of Sami, and Irving Penn: Photographs. He has also published his writing in magazines like AfterAll and Afterimage, Index, European Photography, Glänta, KunstPluss, and Hjärnstorm. He has been a visiting professor at Aalto-universitetet, Helsinki,